---
title: Fitness For Geeks
author: Bruce W Perry
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2012
isbn: 1449399894
web: http://www.fitnessfg.com/
layout: review
---
 
There's a movement afoot in the geek world. After decades of sitting in front
of screens and only eating flat food we're finally realising that this
lifestyle isn't that good for us. And many of us have decided to do something
about it.Of course, being geeks we see fitness as a phenomena to be
investigated, a problem to be solved. As a result we now have books like
*Fitness For Geeks* which examines all of the areas that you need to consider
when trying to get fit and presents them in a way that that appeals to the
geek mentality.

The first chapter is really an introduction. It explains why most current
lifestyles (and not just geek ones) are at odds with the way our metabolism
has evolved. Perry's thesis (and it's a convincing one) is that it's only ten
thousand years since all humans were hunting for their food and that's not
long enough for our bodies to have evolved away from their hunter-gather
blueprint - which means that we need to find other ways to burn off the
calories which we no longer use hunting.

Chapter two switches to full-on geek mode and surveys some of the many gadgets
that are available to help you lose weight and get fit. Geeks love their
gadgets and this was one of the most interesting chapters for me. The idea
behind most of these gadgets is that if you can measure something then you can
improve it and track the improvements. For example, I was using a
[FitBit](http://fitbit.com/) before I started reading the book. The FitBit
tracks the amount of exercise you take during the day - basically by
monitoring the number of steps you take and the number of stairs you climb. By
reducing these measurements to a few simple numbers it becomes easy to see how
well you are doing. I walk around more than I did before I got the FitBit and
I'm always hoping to beat my previous record number of steps in a day. But the
FitBit is just one device. There are plenty of other devices, smartphone apps
and web sites that can help you track your exercise, the calories you eat and
your progress.

The next four chapters look at input - or, in non-geek terms, food and
nutrition. Chapter three explains what protein, carbohydrates and fat are and
why they are important in your diet. Chapter four does the same for
micro-nutrients like vitamins. Chapter five takes the science from the two
previous chapters and turns it into practical advice for a healthier diet.
Chapter six might be slightly controversial as it talks about fasting and
suggests that you try "intermittent fasting" - where you only eat during part
of the day. For example you might only eat during eight hours of the day and
fast for the other sixteen. Parry highly recommends it. Personally, I'm in no
hurry to try it.

Next we have a few chapters about exercise. Chapter seven talks about getting
outside to walk, hike, ski or run and chapter eight is a beginners guide to
the gym. Chapter nine recommends randomising your exercise program and reviews
some web sites and apps that can help with that. Chapter ten goes back to
nutrition and looks at some supplements that you might want to add to your
diet. Finally chapter eleven introduces the idea of hormesis (or "good
stress") as a way to make your workouts more effective.

As someone who is just starting to think about losing weight after after a
lifetime of sitting at desks and avoiding the gym there's a lot to think about
in this book. Currently, I think I'm doing well if I fit three or four
two-mile walks into my week, but I've started to consider jogging too. It'll
still be some time before I persuade myself into a gym. But this book has
given me plenty of food for thought. And by presenting the information in a
way that appeals to geeks, Perry has ensured that I'll be going back to this
book regularly for the next step on my journey.

If you're a little out of shape (and, let's face it, most of us are) then I'm
sure you'll find this book useful.
