---
title: Advanced Web Metrics with Google Analytics
author: Brian Clifton
publisher: Sybex
year: 2008
isbn: 0470253126
web: http://www.advanced-web-metrics.com/
layout: review
---
 
I've been running Google Analytics on a number of web sites since it was first
released in 2005. I've got a lot of good information out of it, but I've
always suspected that I'm not using it to its full potential. Having read this
book I now have a much better idea of what I'm missing and, more importantly,
how I can put that right.

Brian Clifton has written a really useful guide to getting the most benefit
out of Google's free web analytics system. He is, of course, well-placed to do
that as he leads the Google Analytics team for Europe, the Middle East and
Africa.

Part one is a good overview of web analytics is. Chapter one explains what web
analytics is and what you can get out of it. Chapter two goes into more detail
about the method that people use to analyse their web site traffic and chapter
three introduces Google Analytics and explains where it fits into the web
analytics landscape.

Part two gives an introduction to using Google Analytics. Chapter four looks
at the interface to Google Analytics. This chapter gives the reader a good
feel for the interactivity of the Google Analytics interface. It's this
interactivity that makes Google Analytics far easier to use than many of its
competitors. Chapter five looks in more depth at ten of the reports that the
system generates. By the end of this chapter I was already learning new little
tips about the system.

Part three is about implementing Google Analytics on your web site. chapter
six shows you how to tag your web pages so they are included in your reports.
This is about as far as my Google Analytics knowledge goes. So chapter seven
introduces ways to customise the Google Javascript code in order to have more
control over what data is recorded, it was all new (and very interesting). For
example, the chapter has techniques for measuring page load time and tracking
outgoing links. Chapter eight is all about Google Analytics best practices and
is full of the kinds of tips that only an expert in using the tool would be
able to share with you. Having read this chapter I configured up some of my
sites to track search queries and set up more goals on my sites. Chapter nine
is called "Google Analytics Hacks" and is a really useful cookbook of tips and
techniques for getting even more out of Google Analytics. Top of my list of
things to implement from this chapter is to add tracking to all of my error
pages.

The sections we've discussed so far have all been about generating as much
useful data about your web site traffic as possible. But, of course, huge
piles of data don't do you any good at all unless you can make some sense of
the data and then act on your findings. This is what part four is about.
Chapter ten offers some useful hints on how to make sense of all of the data
you have collected. Clifton looks at a web site from a number of points of
view (sales, marketing, web content creator and webmaster) and for each of
them suggests a number of key performance indicators that will be of interest
to them. He then shows how to construct these KPIs out of the data that Google
Analytics has captured. Chapter eleven moves on to the next stage and looks a
number of real-world examples where data from Google Analytics can be used to
identify poor performance from areas of a web site and suggests ways to
improve matters.

I'm no web analytics expert and, to be honest, some of the stuff in part four
made my eyes glaze over a little. But my company doesn't rely on its web site
for income so I've never had to worry about the number of visitors I get or
how long they spend on the site. Web analytics has really just been a hobby
for me. If I was in a company where those kinds of things were important, then
I feel confident that this book would be the right one to turn to in order to
learn more. This book certainly goes into more depth when talking about both
the technical side of Google Analytics and how to interpret the data than any
other book I've read on the subject.

This book has taught me a lot of new and interesting things about Google
Analytics and I feel sure that I'll be going back to it in the future when I
need to know more. I'd recommend it to anyone who wants to get the most out of
their Google Analytics installation.
