---
title: Apache 2 Pocket Reference
author: Andrew Ford
publisher: O'Reilly
year: 2008
isbn: 0596518889
layout: review
--- 

There's no question that Apache powers the World Wide Wide. It runs over half
of the world's web sites. If you work in the web industry then there's every
chance that you'll have to deal with Apache at some point. Like many people, I
don't consider myself a webmaster, but I run several web sites using Apache so
I need to know how to get the most out of it.

Over the years, I have bought several books about Apache. They tend to get
read once and then left to gather dust on the bookshelf. I never really need
an in-depth knowledge of Apache, but I often need to know all about the one
feature that I need to solve my current problem. Usually this involves a lot
of Googling, but now I think I'll have this book on my desk and it will save
me a lot of time.

This book does exactly what the title implies. It is a complete (but concise)
reference to Apache. In particular, most of the book is taken up with
descriptions of Apache's myriad configuration options. This material all uses
a standard layout which makes it easy to find and understand exactly the
information that you need. One particularly nice touch is a key at the top of
each entry telling you which contexts a configuration option can be used in.
Never again will I have an excuse for putting an option in a .htaccess file
when it only works in a directory context.

There is a lot of information packed into this small book. No space is wasted
cramming the data in. But it's not too dense to be unusable. The information
is always clear and easy to follow.

If you're a part-time Apache webmaster like me, then I think you'll find this
book very useful.
